talentsphere-frontend/AI_SCHOLARSHIP_PARSER_README.md, before:

# AI Scholarship Parser - Complete Guide

## 🎓 Overview

The AI Scholarship Parser is an intelligent automation tool that uses Google Gemini AI to automatically extract and populate **40+ scholarship fields** from raw text. It dramatically reduces the time needed to create scholarship postings by parsing unstructured scholarship content into TalentSphere's structured format.

### Key Features

- ✨ **Automated Field Extraction**: Parses 40+ fields automatically
- 🧠 **Intelligent Category Matching**: Matches scholarships to appropriate categories
- 📊 **Field Analysis**: Shows which fields were successfully filled
- 🔄 **Markdown Conversion**: Converts descriptions to clean markdown format
- ✅ **Data Validation**: Ensures all extracted data is valid and properly formatted
- 🎯 **High Accuracy**: Powered by Google Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite

## 📋 Extracted Fields

### Basic Information (5 fields)
- Title
- Summary (auto-generated if missing)
- Description (converted to markdown)
- Scholarship type
- Category ID

### Organization Details (4 fields)
- Organization name
- Organization website
- Organization logo URL
- Source URL

### Academic Information (2 fields)
- Study level
- Field of study

### Location & Eligibility (6 fields)
- Location type
- Country
- City
- State
- Nationality requirements
- Gender requirements

### Financial Details (6 fields)
- Minimum amount
- Maximum amount
- Currency
- Funding type
- Renewable status
- Duration (years)

### Requirements (3 fields)
- Minimum GPA
- Maximum age
- Other requirements

### Application Details (7 fields)
- Application type
- Application deadline
- Application email
- Application URL
- Application instructions
- Required documents
- Essay topics

### Document Requirements (5 fields)
- Requires transcript
- Requires recommendation letters
- Number of recommendation letters
- Requires essay
- Requires portfolio

**Total: 40+ fields automatically extracted**

## 🚀 Quick Start

### 1. Setup API Key

Get your free Gemini API key from [Google AI Studio](https://aistudio.google.com/apikey).

Add to your `.env` file:
```bash
VITE_GEMINI_API_KEY=your_gemini_api_key_here
```

### 2. Use the AI Parser

1. Navigate to **External Admin → Create Scholarship**
2. Click the **✨ AI Auto-Fill** button (purple gradient button)
3. Paste scholarship content into the text area
4. Click **Parse with AI**
5. Wait 3-5 seconds for AI to process
6. Review and complete any missing fields
7. Submit the form

## 💡 Usage Examples

### Example 1: International Scholarship

**Input:**
```
Gates Cambridge Scholarship 2024

The Gates Cambridge Scholarship is one of the most prestigious international scholarships in the world. 

Award: Full funding including tuition, living expenses, and travel (approximately £45,000 per year)
Duration: Full course length (1-4 years)
Eligibility: International students (non-UK) applying for graduate study
GPA Requirement: Minimum 3.7 GPA
Deadline: October 12, 2024

Requirements:
- Academic excellence
- Leadership potential
- Commitment to improving lives of others

Application: Apply through University of Cambridge Graduate Application Portal
Website: https://www.gatescambridge.org
```

**AI Will Extract:**
- Title: "Gates Cambridge Scholarship 2024"
- Organization: "Gates Cambridge Trust"
- Amount: £45,000
- Study Level: Graduate
- GPA: 3.7
- Deadline: October 12, 2024
- And 30+ more fields...

### Example 2: STEM Scholarship

**Input:**
```
Women in STEM Scholarship

Supporting female students pursuing careers in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics.

Scholarship Details:
- Award Amount: $5,000 - $10,000
- Open to: Female undergraduate and graduate students
- Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Physics, Mathematics
- GPA Requirement: 3.0 minimum
- Deadline: March 15, 2024

How to Apply:
Submit application via email to scholarships@womeninstem.org with:
1. Academic transcript
2. Two recommendation letters
3. Personal essay (500 words) on "Why STEM?"
4. Resume

Learn more: https://womeninstem.org/scholarship
```

**AI Will Extract:**
- Title: "Women in STEM Scholarship"
- Amount Range: $5,000 - $10,000
- Gender: Female
- Field of Study: Engineering, Computer Science
- Min GPA: 3.0
- Required Documents: Transcript, recommendations, essay
- And 30+ more fields...

## 🔧 Technical Details

### Architecture

```
User Input (Raw Text)
    ↓
aiScholarshipParser.js
    ↓
Google Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite API
    ↓
JSON Response
    ↓
Data Validation & Cleaning
    ↓
Form Auto-Fill
```

### File Structure

```
talentsphere-frontend/
├── src/
│   ├── services/
│   │   └── aiScholarshipParser.js    # AI parser service
│   └── pages/
│       └── external-admin/
│           └── CreateScholarship.jsx  # Form with AI integration
├── .env                               # API key configuration
└── AI_SCHOLARSHIP_PARSER_README.md   # This file
```

### Key Functions

#### `parseScholarshipWithAI(rawContent, categories)`
Main function that sends content to Gemini AI and returns parsed data.

**Parameters:**
- `rawContent` (string): Raw scholarship text
- `categories` (array): Available scholarship categories from backend

**Returns:** 
- Promise<Object>: Parsed scholarship data

**Throws:**
- Error if API key missing
- Error if parsing fails
- Error if quota exceeded

#### `validateAndCleanScholarshipData(data)`
Validates and cleans AI-parsed data to ensure correct types and ranges.

#### `analyzeFilledFields(parsedData)`
Analyzes which fields were successfully filled by AI.

**Returns:**
```javascript
{
  totalFields: 40,
  filledFields: 35,
  emptyFields: 5,
  sections: {
    basic: { total: 5, filled: 5, empty: 0 },
    organization: { total: 4, filled: 3, empty: 1 },
    // ... more sections
  }
}
```

## 📊 Data Validation

The parser validates and cleans all extracted data:

### String Fields
- Trimmed of whitespace
- Null/undefined/N/A values removed
- Length limits enforced

### Numeric Fields
- **GPA**: 0.0 - 4.0 range
- **Age**: 16 - 100 range
- **Amount**: Positive integers only
- **Duration**: 1 - 10 years
- **Recommendation Letters**: 0 - 10 range

### URL Fields
- Must start with http:// or https://
- Markdown link formatting removed
- Protocol added if missing
- Validated against URL format

### Date Fields
- Converted to ISO 8601 format
- Must be in the future (for deadlines)
- Formatted as YYYY-MM-DDTHH:mm for HTML inputs

### Boolean Fields
- Converted from strings ("true"/"false")
- Proper boolean type enforced

## 🎯 Field Mapping Reference

### Scholarship Types
```
merit-based, need-based, sports, academic, research, 
diversity, community, athletic, art, stem, international
```

### Study Levels
```
undergraduate, graduate, postgraduate, phd, vocational
```

### Funding Types
```
full, partial, tuition-only, living-expenses
```

### Application Types
```
external, email, internal
```

### Location Types
```
any, specific-country, specific-city
```

### Gender Requirements
```
any, male, female, other
```

## 🚨 Troubleshooting

### API Key Issues

**Problem:** "Gemini API key is not configured"

**Solution:**
1. Create `.env` file in `talentsphere-frontend/` directory
2. Add: `VITE_GEMINI_API_KEY=your_key_here`
3. Restart the development server: `npm run dev`

### Quota Exceeded

**Problem:** "API quota exceeded"

**Solution:**
- Free tier: 15 requests/minute, 1,500/day
- Wait 1 minute and try again
- Check usage at [Google AI Studio](https://aistudio.google.com/)
- Consider upgrading to paid tier if needed

### Parsing Errors

**Problem:** "Failed to parse AI response"

**Solutions:**
1. Ensure input text is clear and well-structured
2. Include key information (title, amount, deadline)
3. Try rephrasing or reformatting the input
4. Check browser console for detailed error messages

### Missing Fields

**Problem:** Some fields not auto-filled

**Solutions:**
1. Review the console.table() output to see what was extracted
2. Manually fill missing required fields
3. Ensure source text contains the missing information
4. More detailed source text = better results

### Date Format Issues

**Problem:** Dates not parsing correctly

**Solutions:**
1. Use clear date formats: "March 15, 2024" or "2024-03-15"
2. Avoid ambiguous formats like "03/04/24"
3. Include time if available: "March 15, 2024 11:59 PM"

## 💰 API Costs & Limits

### Free Tier (Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite)
- ✅ **15 requests per minute**
- ✅ **1,500 requests per day**
- ✅ **1 million tokens per day**
- ✅ **$0.00 cost**

### Average Usage per Parse
- ~2,000 tokens per request
- ~3-5 seconds per parse
- You can parse **1,500 scholarships/day** for free

### Cost Comparison
- **Manual entry**: ~10-15 minutes per scholarship
- **AI parser**: ~30 seconds per scholarship
- **Time saved**: 95% reduction in data entry time

## 🔐 Security & Privacy

### API Key Security
- ✅ API key stored in `.env` file (not committed to Git)
- ✅ Only accessible on client-side (Vite environment)
- ✅ Never exposed in production builds

### Data Privacy
- ✅ No scholarship data stored by Google
- ✅ Requests are ephemeral
- ✅ No training on your data
- ✅ GDPR compliant

## 📈 Performance Metrics

### Speed
- Average parse time: **3-5 seconds**
- Manual entry time: **10-15 minutes**
- **Time savings: 95%**

### Accuracy
- Field extraction rate: **85-95%**
- Category matching accuracy: **90%+**
- Data validation success: **98%+**

### Reliability
- Success rate: **95%+**
- Error handling: Comprehensive
- Fallback: Manual entry always available

## 🎓 Best Practices

### For Best Results

1. **Include Complete Information**
   - Title, organization, amounts, dates
   - Eligibility criteria
   - Application process

2. **Use Clear Formatting**
   - Separate sections with headings
   - Use bullet points for lists
   - Include labels (Amount:, Deadline:, etc.)

3. **Provide Context**
   - Include organization details
   - Specify study level and field
   - List all requirements

4. **Review AI Results**
   - Always check extracted data
   - Fill any missing required fields
   - Verify dates and amounts

### Common Mistakes to Avoid

❌ **Don't** paste incomplete information
❌ **Don't** use ambiguous abbreviations
❌ **Don't** mix multiple scholarships in one parse
❌ **Don't** forget to review extracted data

✅ **Do** provide complete scholarship details
✅ **Do** use standard terminology
✅ **Do** parse one scholarship at a time
✅ **Do** verify all auto-filled fields

## 🔄 Integration with Existing Features

### Works With
- ✅ JSON Import feature
- ✅ Form validation
- ✅ Markdown editor
- ✅ Preview mode
- ✅ Draft saving

### Complements
- ✅ Manual form entry
- ✅ Template system
- ✅ Scholarship categories
- ✅ Organization profiles

## 📝 Future Enhancements

### Planned Features
- [ ] Bulk scholarship import (multiple at once)
- [ ] AI-suggested categories with confidence scores
- [ ] Automatic image extraction from URLs
- [ ] Smart field validation suggestions
- [ ] Historical parse accuracy tracking
- [ ] Template generation from parsed data

## 🤝 Support

### Need Help?

1. **Check Console Logs**: Detailed logging for debugging
2. **Review Documentation**: This file has comprehensive guides
3. **Test with Examples**: Use provided sample scholarships
4. **Check API Status**: Visit Google AI Studio

### Common Questions

**Q: Can I parse multiple scholarships at once?**
A: Currently, parse one scholarship at a time for best results.

**Q: What if AI gets something wrong?**
A: Simply edit the auto-filled fields manually. AI is a helper, not a replacement.

**Q: Is there a cost?**
A: Free tier allows 1,500 parses/day, which is plenty for most users.

**Q: Can I use my own AI model?**
A: Currently supports Gemini only. Other models may be added in future.

## 📄 License

This feature is part of TalentSphere and follows the project's license.

## 🎉 Credits

- **AI Model**: Google Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite
- **Integration**: TalentSphere Development Team
- **Similar Tool**: Based on aiJobParser.js architecture

---

**Last Updated**: November 22, 2025
**Version**: 1.0.0
**Status**: ✅ Production Ready

Commit message:

feat: Increase database field lengths for titles and add multi-select study levels
- Title fields: 200 → 500 characters (fixes truncation errors)
- Study level: 50 → 200 characters (supports multiple values)
- Organization fields increased for longer names/URLs
- Added migration scripts for database updates
- Updated AI parsers with new field limits
- Added multi-select UI for study levels in scholarship form

talentsphere-frontend/AI_SCHOLARSHIP_PARSER_README.md, after:

# AI Scholarship Parser - Complete Guide

## 🎓 Overview

The AI Scholarship Parser is an intelligent automation tool that uses Google Gemini AI to automatically extract and populate **40+ scholarship fields** from raw text. It dramatically reduces the time needed to create scholarship postings by parsing unstructured scholarship content into TalentSphere's structured format.

### Key Features

- ✨ **Automated Field Extraction**: Parses 40+ fields automatically
- 🧠 **Intelligent Category Matching**: Matches scholarships to appropriate categories
- 📊 **Field Analysis**: Shows which fields were successfully filled
- 🔄 **Markdown Conversion**: Converts descriptions to clean markdown format
- ✅ **Data Validation**: Ensures all extracted data is valid and properly formatted
- 🎯 **High Accuracy**: Powered by Google Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite

## 📋 Extracted Fields

### Basic Information (5 fields)
- Title
- Summary (auto-generated if missing)
- Description (converted to markdown)
- Scholarship type
- Category ID

### Organization Details (4 fields)
- Organization name
- Organization website
- Organization logo URL
- Source URL

### Academic Information (2 fields)
- Study level (comma-separated for multiple levels)
- Field of study

### Location & Eligibility (6 fields)
- Location type
- Country
- City
- State
- Nationality requirements
- Gender requirements

### Financial Details (6 fields)
- Minimum amount
- Maximum amount
- Currency
- Funding type
- Renewable status
- Duration (years)

### Requirements (3 fields)
- Minimum GPA
- Maximum age
- Other requirements

### Application Details (7 fields)
- Application type
- Application deadline
- Application email
- Application URL
- Application instructions
- Required documents
- Essay topics

### Document Requirements (5 fields)
- Requires transcript
- Requires recommendation letters
- Number of recommendation letters
- Requires essay
- Requires portfolio

**Total: 40+ fields automatically extracted**

## 🚀 Quick Start

### 1. Setup API Key

Get your free Gemini API key from [Google AI Studio](https://aistudio.google.com/apikey).

Add to your `.env` file:
```bash
VITE_GEMINI_API_KEY=your_gemini_api_key_here
```

### 2. Use the AI Parser

1. Navigate to **External Admin → Create Scholarship**
2. Click the **✨ AI Auto-Fill** button (purple gradient button)
3. Paste scholarship content into the text area
4. Click **Parse with AI**
5. Wait 3-5 seconds for AI to process
6. Review and complete any missing fields
7. Submit the form

## 💡 Usage Examples

### Example 1: International Scholarship

**Input:**
```
Gates Cambridge Scholarship 2024

The Gates Cambridge Scholarship is one of the most prestigious international scholarships in the world. 

Award: Full funding including tuition, living expenses, and travel (approximately £45,000 per year)
Duration: Full course length (1-4 years)
Eligibility: International students (non-UK) applying for graduate study
GPA Requirement: Minimum 3.7 GPA
Deadline: October 12, 2024

Requirements:
- Academic excellence
- Leadership potential
- Commitment to improving lives of others

Application: Apply through University of Cambridge Graduate Application Portal
Website: https://www.gatescambridge.org
```

**AI Will Extract:**
- Title: "Gates Cambridge Scholarship 2024"
- Organization: "Gates Cambridge Trust"
- Amount: £45,000
- Study Level: Graduate
- GPA: 3.7
- Deadline: October 12, 2024
- And 30+ more fields...

### Example 2: STEM Scholarship

**Input:**
```
Women in STEM Scholarship

Supporting female students pursuing careers in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics.

Scholarship Details:
- Award Amount: $5,000 - $10,000
- Open to: Female undergraduate and graduate students
- Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Physics, Mathematics
- GPA Requirement: 3.0 minimum
- Deadline: March 15, 2024

How to Apply:
Submit application via email to scholarships@womeninstem.org with:
1. Academic transcript
2. Two recommendation letters
3. Personal essay (500 words) on "Why STEM?"
4. Resume

Learn more: https://womeninstem.org/scholarship
```

**AI Will Extract:**
- Title: "Women in STEM Scholarship"
- Amount Range: $5,000 - $10,000
- Gender: Female
- Field of Study: Engineering, Computer Science
- Min GPA: 3.0
- Required Documents: Transcript, recommendations, essay
- And 30+ more fields...

## 🔧 Technical Details

### Architecture

```
User Input (Raw Text)
    ↓
aiScholarshipParser.js
    ↓
Google Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite API
    ↓
JSON Response
    ↓
Data Validation & Cleaning
    ↓
Form Auto-Fill
```

### File Structure

```
talentsphere-frontend/
├── src/
│   ├── services/
│   │   └── aiScholarshipParser.js    # AI parser service
│   └── pages/
│       └── external-admin/
│           └── CreateScholarship.jsx  # Form with AI integration
├── .env                               # API key configuration
└── AI_SCHOLARSHIP_PARSER_README.md   # This file
```

### Key Functions

#### `parseScholarshipWithAI(rawContent, categories)`
Main function that sends content to Gemini AI and returns parsed data.

**Parameters:**
- `rawContent` (string): Raw scholarship text
- `categories` (array): Available scholarship categories from backend

**Returns:** 
- Promise<Object>: Parsed scholarship data

**Throws:**
- Error if API key missing
- Error if parsing fails
- Error if quota exceeded

#### `validateAndCleanScholarshipData(data)`
Validates and cleans AI-parsed data to ensure correct types and ranges.

#### `analyzeFilledFields(parsedData)`
Analyzes which fields were successfully filled by AI.

**Returns:**
```javascript
{
  totalFields: 40,
  filledFields: 35,
  emptyFields: 5,
  sections: {
    basic: { total: 5, filled: 5, empty: 0 },
    organization: { total: 4, filled: 3, empty: 1 },
    // ... more sections
  }
}
```

## 📊 Data Validation

The parser validates and cleans all extracted data:

### String Fields
- Trimmed of whitespace
- Null/undefined/N/A values removed
- Length limits enforced

### Numeric Fields
- **GPA**: 0.0 - 4.0 range
- **Age**: 16 - 100 range
- **Amount**: Positive integers only
- **Duration**: 1 - 10 years
- **Recommendation Letters**: 0 - 10 range

### URL Fields
- Must start with http:// or https://
- Markdown link formatting removed
- Protocol added if missing
- Validated against URL format

### Date Fields
- Converted to ISO 8601 format
- Must be in the future (for deadlines)
- Formatted as YYYY-MM-DDTHH:mm for HTML inputs

### Boolean Fields
- Converted from strings ("true"/"false")
- Proper boolean type enforced

## 🎯 Field Mapping Reference

### Scholarship Types
```
merit-based, need-based, sports, academic, research, 
diversity, community, athletic, art, stem, international
```

### Study Levels
```
undergraduate, graduate, postgraduate, phd, vocational
(Can be comma-separated for multiple levels: "undergraduate,graduate")
```

### Funding Types
```
full, partial, tuition-only, living-expenses
```

### Application Types
```
external, email, internal
```

### Location Types
```
any, specific-country, specific-city
```

### Gender Requirements
```
any, male, female, other
```

## 🚨 Troubleshooting

### API Key Issues

**Problem:** "Gemini API key is not configured"

**Solution:**
1. Create `.env` file in `talentsphere-frontend/` directory
2. Add: `VITE_GEMINI_API_KEY=your_key_here`
3. Restart the development server: `npm run dev`

### Quota Exceeded

**Problem:** "API quota exceeded"

**Solution:**
- Free tier: 15 requests/minute, 1,500/day
- Wait 1 minute and try again
- Check usage at [Google AI Studio](https://aistudio.google.com/)
- Consider upgrading to paid tier if needed

### Parsing Errors

**Problem:** "Failed to parse AI response"

**Solutions:**
1. Ensure input text is clear and well-structured
2. Include key information (title, amount, deadline)
3. Try rephrasing or reformatting the input
4. Check browser console for detailed error messages

### Missing Fields

**Problem:** Some fields not auto-filled

**Solutions:**
1. Review the console.table() output to see what was extracted
2. Manually fill missing required fields
3. Ensure source text contains the missing information
4. More detailed source text = better results

### Date Format Issues

**Problem:** Dates not parsing correctly

**Solutions:**
1. Use clear date formats: "March 15, 2024" or "2024-03-15"
2. Avoid ambiguous formats like "03/04/24"
3. Include time if available: "March 15, 2024 11:59 PM"

## 💰 API Costs & Limits

### Free Tier (Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite)
- ✅ **15 requests per minute**
- ✅ **1,500 requests per day**
- ✅ **1 million tokens per day**
- ✅ **$0.00 cost**

### Average Usage per Parse
- ~2,000 tokens per request
- ~3-5 seconds per parse
- You can parse **1,500 scholarships/day** for free

### Cost Comparison
- **Manual entry**: ~10-15 minutes per scholarship
- **AI parser**: ~30 seconds per scholarship
- **Time saved**: 95% reduction in data entry time

## 🔐 Security & Privacy

### API Key Security
- ✅ API key stored in `.env` file (not committed to Git)
- ✅ Only accessible on client-side (Vite environment)
- ✅ Never exposed in production builds

### Data Privacy
- ✅ No scholarship data stored by Google
- ✅ Requests are ephemeral
- ✅ No training on your data
- ✅ GDPR compliant

## 📈 Performance Metrics

### Speed
- Average parse time: **3-5 seconds**
- Manual entry time: **10-15 minutes**
- **Time savings: 95%**

### Accuracy
- Field extraction rate: **85-95%**
- Category matching accuracy: **90%+**
- Data validation success: **98%+**

### Reliability
- Success rate: **95%+**
- Error handling: Comprehensive
- Fallback: Manual entry always available

## 🎓 Best Practices

### For Best Results

1. **Include Complete Information**
   - Title, organization, amounts, dates
   - Eligibility criteria
   - Application process

2. **Use Clear Formatting**
   - Separate sections with headings
   - Use bullet points for lists
   - Include labels (Amount:, Deadline:, etc.)

3. **Provide Context**
   - Include organization details
   - Specify study level and field
   - List all requirements

4. **Review AI Results**
   - Always check extracted data
   - Fill any missing required fields
   - Verify dates and amounts

### Common Mistakes to Avoid

❌ **Don't** paste incomplete information
❌ **Don't** use ambiguous abbreviations
❌ **Don't** mix multiple scholarships in one parse
❌ **Don't** forget to review extracted data

✅ **Do** provide complete scholarship details
✅ **Do** use standard terminology
✅ **Do** parse one scholarship at a time
✅ **Do** verify all auto-filled fields

## 🔄 Integration with Existing Features

### Works With
- ✅ JSON Import feature
- ✅ Form validation
- ✅ Markdown editor
- ✅ Preview mode
- ✅ Draft saving

### Complements
- ✅ Manual form entry
- ✅ Template system
- ✅ Scholarship categories
- ✅ Organization profiles

## 📝 Future Enhancements

### Planned Features
- [ ] Bulk scholarship import (multiple at once)
- [ ] AI-suggested categories with confidence scores
- [ ] Automatic image extraction from URLs
- [ ] Smart field validation suggestions
- [ ] Historical parse accuracy tracking
- [ ] Template generation from parsed data

## 🤝 Support

### Need Help?

1. **Check Console Logs**: Detailed logging for debugging
2. **Review Documentation**: This file has comprehensive guides
3. **Test with Examples**: Use provided sample scholarships
4. **Check API Status**: Visit Google AI Studio

### Common Questions

**Q: Can I parse multiple scholarships at once?**
A: Currently, parse one scholarship at a time for best results.

**Q: What if AI gets something wrong?**
A: Simply edit the auto-filled fields manually. AI is a helper, not a replacement.

**Q: Is there a cost?**
A: Free tier allows 1,500 parses/day, which is plenty for most users.

**Q: Can I use my own AI model?**
A: Currently supports Gemini only. Other models may be added in future.

## 📄 License

This feature is part of TalentSphere and follows the project's license.

## 🎉 Credits

- **AI Model**: Google Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite
- **Integration**: TalentSphere Development Team
- **Similar Tool**: Based on aiJobParser.js architecture

---

**Last Updated**: November 22, 2025
**Version**: 1.0.0
**Status**: ✅ Production Ready
